I joined the British Royal Navy
at the tender age of 17
and in three decades of service,
lived in worked in every ocean.
I witnessed firsthand
the hidden world of the high seas,
sometimes the only vessel
for hundreds of miles.
And other times I'd wake up
surrounded in a fishing fleet
that, despite having powerful
technology at my fingertips,
I didn’t really know who they were
or what they’d been doing.
It is a Wild West out there,
and rogue fishers ...
rogue fishes are extracting --
well, they’re disobeying the laws
that we put in place
to protect our ocean and its resources.
And they're pillaging
colossal amounts of fish.
Seafood,
one fifth of seafood is thought to be
caught illegally or is simply unreported.
And that's a crime worth
up to 23.5 billion dollars.
And it's a crime that skews the science,
so it affects the sustainability
of our fisheries,
it threatens the health of our ocean
and the well-being of millions of people,
mainly in poorer countries.
And it's not just pirate fishing
that's threatening
the future of our ocean.
Out at sea, oil spills
are going undetected
and therefore unpunished.
There’s a massive, unmonitored
growth in shipping,
oil and gas exploration and aquaculture,
to mention just a few.
And this is piling pressure on an ocean
that's already stressed by climate change.
The straightforward fact is,
if you can't see it, you can't manage it.
And I know from experience,
you can't monitor the whole ocean
from the decks of ships.
But you can from space.
And these are interesting times
because seemingly intractable problems
are starting to yield
to the power of technology, AI,
and global interconnectedness.
Up there right now,
there's thousands of satellites,
beaming back an enormous amount of data
from the remotest parts of our ocean.
What if we could harness that data,
make it useful and available to people
who care about the ocean?
Well, thanks to rapid advances in
technology and AI, we can do that.
Using GPS location data
and machine learning,
Global Fishing Watch built
the first-ever live stream map
to monitor the industrial fishing fleet.
At the moment, we see some 70,000 vessels.
We've made this information public
and freely available to the world.
But technology moves on.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Technology moves on rapidly.
There's new and emerging technology
that we need to embrace
in order to give this picture
to everybody who needs it.
Like when we were working with our
partners in Japan and South Korea,
they told us there was illegal fishing
suspected in North Korean waters
in contravention
of the UN sanctions there.
But when we first took a look on our map,
we could see very little fishing
because those vessels were not sharing
their GPS location data,
as they should.
We call them “dark vessels.”
And generally, dark vessels
are up to no good.
So we had to turn
to other sources of data.
We looked at satellite-based
radar and optical imagery,
and we lit that region up.
We revealed an armada
of almost 1,000 vessels.
It's one of the largest cases
of illegal fishing ever seen.
But there's huge human impact too.
Tragedy.
Because they're smaller,
more rickety North Korean boats
could not compete with that vast fleet.
They were pushed further and further
out to sea, and as a result,
hundreds of them would be capsized
to be washed ashore in Japan
with the crew either starving or dead.
We made our findings public
and as a result,
we compelled the authorities
to take action.
Illegal fishing in that region
has dropped by 75 percent,
and we're not seeing hundreds of vessels
now washing ashore in Japan.
(Applause)
The good news is
that the techniques we used
to illuminate what
was happening in North Korea,
we can use anywhere and everywhere
to make the invisible visible.
Today, any of you can click
on the internet
to explore roads and buildings on land.
Why can't we do the same for the ocean?
We need to create a dynamic, complete map
of all industrial activity out at sea
and make it available
to everybody for free.
Well, thanks to the Audacious community,
we're going to do that using
GPS location data
and millions of gigabytes
of satellite imagery,
we’ll use AI to map and monitor
more than a million oceangoing vessels.
We will monitor the entire
industrial fishing fleet
and those dark vessels.
We'll add in hundreds
of thousands of cargo vessels,
tens of thousands of oil
and gas structures,
aquaculture farms and wind farms.
With this public information,
conservationists will have
the information they need
to protect critical habitats.
Like National Geographic Pristine Seas.
They're using our data to help
work with governments and communities
to protect critical habitats
in seven marine parks
with a combined area of more
than twice that of California.
And we're going to give researchers
the data they need
to advance ocean science.
And we’re going to give
the media, campaigners
and the public powerful knowledge
about human activity out at sea.
And this comes just in time
because after two decades of talking,
we finally have a treaty to manage
the conservation of ocean life
and the establishment of marine protected
areas out on our ocean.
(Applause)
And this is going to be critical because
almost 200 countries have committed
to protecting 30 percent of the ocean
by 2030.
And they will need tools like this
to uphold that promise.
We can develop the tools
that governments need
to uphold their commitments.
We can inspire a new wave
of ocean management
through public data
and open technology.
Now, I might have salt in my veins,
but you don't need
to have sailed the seven seas
to care about the future of the ocean.
All life on Earth depends on it.
It's providing the oxygen we breathe,
it’s regulating our climate,
and it's providing the food
that billions of people rely on.
But ocean resources are not inexhaustible,
we’ve got to protect them.
We have the chance
to do that today like never before.
We can give a free, open-access
monitoring system for the entire ocean.
Together we can reign in
this outlaw ocean.
We can end pirate fishing.
And we can transform ocean management
for the common good of all.
Thank you.
(Applause)